docs/reverse-sync/00-overview.md, before:

# OpenFaith Reverse Sync Implementation Guide

## Overview

This document outlines the implementation of **reverse sync** - the ability to push changes from OpenFaith's Canonical Data Model (CDM) back to external Church Management Systems (ChMS) like Planning Center Online (PCO).

## Current State Analysis

OpenFaith already has **90% of the infrastructure** needed for reverse sync:

### ✅ **Existing Infrastructure**

- **Bidirectional Schema Transformers**: `pcoPersonTransformer = pcoToOf(PcoPersonAttributes, BasePerson, 'person')`
- **HTTP API Clients**: `PcoHttpClient` with full CRUD operations, auth, rate limiting, error handling
- **Schema Annotations**: `[OfEntity]: 'person'` for auto-discovery
- **Entity Manifests**: `pcoEntityManifest` with endpoint definitions
- **Token Management**: `TokenManager` abstraction with live implementations

### 🔴 **Missing Components**

1. **ExternalLinkManager** - Service to manage entity-to-ChMS mappings
2. **External Sync Functions** - Functions to orchestrate reverse sync operations
3. **Auto-Generated Mutators** - Zero mutators with consistent patterns and validation

## Implementation Roadmap

### **Phase 1: Core Services** (High Priority)

- [x] **ExternalLinkManager Service** - Abstract data access layer for external links
  - Postgres implementation (direct DB access for server-side operations)
- [ ] **External Sync Functions** - Main reverse sync orchestration
  - Auto-discovery of transformers and API clients
  - Routing logic based on external links
  - Error handling and retry logic
  - Mirror mutator shape for consistency
  - Effect-based dependency injection

### **Phase 2: Zero Integration** (High Priority)

- [ ] **Auto-Generated Mutators** - Replace manual mutator definitions
  - Discover entities with `[OfEntity]` annotations
  - Generate consistent CRUD mutators with validation
  - Support custom overrides for specific business logic
  - Clean separation - no external sync concerns in mutators

### **Phase 3: Testing & Validation** (Medium Priority)

- [ ] **Integration Tests** - End-to-end reverse sync testing
- [ ] **Error Handling** - Comprehensive error scenarios
- [ ] **Performance Testing** - Bulk operations and rate limiting

## Architecture Overview

```
Zero Mutator (people.update) - Local operations only
    ↓
Server Handler yields External Sync Functions
    ↓
externalSyncFunctions.people.update(tx, input)
    ↓
ExternalLinkManager.getExternalLinksForEntity
    ↓
Schema.encode(pcoPersonTransformer) [EXISTING]
    ↓
PcoHttpClient.Person.update [EXISTING]
```

## Key Design Principles

1. **Effect-TS First** - All services use Effect service pattern
2. **Zero Configuration** - Leverage existing annotations and manifests
3. **Clean Mutators** - Mutators only handle local operations, no external sync
4. **Effect-Based External Sync** - External sync functions use proper dependency injection
5. **Database Health** - No external API calls during database transactions
6. **Mirrored Shape** - External sync functions mirror mutator structure
7. **Reuse Existing Infrastructure** - Build on proven HTTP clients and transformers
8. **Auto-Discovery** - Minimize manual configuration through schema introspection

## Architecture Pattern: Effect-Based External Sync

**✅ SOLUTION**: Using Effect dependency injection, we cleanly separate local mutations from external sync:

- **Clean Mutators**: Handle authentication, validation, and local database updates only
- **External Sync Functions**: Mirror mutator shape, handle external ChMS sync
- **Server Handler**: Uses Effect dependency injection to yield external sync functions
- **No Client Bloat**: Client mutators have no external sync code
- **Database Health**: External API calls don't hold database connections
- **Effect-Based**: Proper dependency management, no imperative patterns

## Success Criteria

- [ ] Auto-generated Zero mutators with consistent validation and patterns
- [ ] External sync properly separated using Effect dependency injection
- [ ] Standalone `pushToExternalSystems` function for SDK users
- [ ] New entities work automatically with `[OfEntity]` annotation
- [ ] Full Effect error handling and type safety
- [ ] Support for multiple ChMS adapters (PCO first, CCB future)

## Implementation Documents

1. **[Effect-Based External Sync](01-client-server-abstraction.md)** - **CRITICAL**: How to separate local mutations from external sync using Effect dependency injection
2. **[ExternalLinkManager Implementation](02-external-link-manager.md)** - Data access abstraction
3. **[External Sync Functions](03-external-sync-functions.md)** - Main sync orchestration functions
4. **[Auto-Generated Mutators](04-auto-generated-mutators.md)** - Zero mutator generation
5. **[Testing & Validation](05-testing-validation.md)** - Testing strategy

## Context Files for Implementation

Key files to understand before implementation:

### **Existing Infrastructure**

- `adapters/pco/api/pcoApi.ts` - HTTP client with auth, rate limiting, error handling
- `adapters/pco/transformer/pcoTransformer.ts` - Bidirectional schema transformers
- `adapters/pco/modules/people/pcoPersonSchema.ts` - Schema with OfEntity annotations
- `adapters/pco/base/pcoEntityManifest.ts` - Entity manifest structure
- `adapters/adapter-core/layers/tokenManager.ts` - Token management abstraction
- `backend/server/live/tokenManagerLive.ts` - Postgres token implementation

### **Current Mutators**

- `packages/zero/mutators.ts` - Current manual mutator implementation (clean, local-only)
- `backend/server/handlers/zeroMutatorsHandler.ts` - Server handler with dependency injection

### **Workflow Patterns**

- `backend/workers/workflows/pcoSyncWorkflow.ts` - Workflow orchestration pattern
- `backend/workers/workflows/pcoSyncEntityWorkflow.ts` - Entity-level sync pattern

This implementation will mirror the proven patterns from inbound sync while leveraging all existing infrastructure for maximum efficiency and reliability.

Commit message:

Enhance ExternalLinkManager and its PostgreSQL implementation with comprehensive error handling, detailed documentation, and improved method signatures. Introduce specific error types for read and write operations, ensuring precise error propagation. Update related documentation to reflect these changes and highlight new features such as bulk operations and soft deletion support.

docs/reverse-sync/00-overview.md, after:

# OpenFaith Reverse Sync Implementation Guide

## Overview

This document outlines the implementation of **reverse sync** - the ability to push changes from OpenFaith's Canonical Data Model (CDM) back to external Church Management Systems (ChMS) like Planning Center Online (PCO).

## Current State Analysis

OpenFaith already has **90% of the infrastructure** needed for reverse sync:

### ✅ **Existing Infrastructure**

- **Bidirectional Schema Transformers**: `pcoPersonTransformer = pcoToOf(PcoPersonAttributes, BasePerson, 'person')`
- **HTTP API Clients**: `PcoHttpClient` with full CRUD operations, auth, rate limiting, error handling
- **Schema Annotations**: `[OfEntity]: 'person'` for auto-discovery
- **Entity Manifests**: `pcoEntityManifest` with endpoint definitions
- **Token Management**: `TokenManager` abstraction with live implementations

### 🔴 **Missing Components**

1. **ExternalLinkManager** - Service to manage entity-to-ChMS mappings
2. **External Sync Functions** - Functions to orchestrate reverse sync operations
3. **Auto-Generated Mutators** - Zero mutators with consistent patterns and validation

## Implementation Roadmap

### **Phase 1: Core Services** (High Priority)

- [x] **ExternalLinkManager Service** - Abstract data access layer for external links
  - ✅ Postgres implementation (direct DB access for server-side operations)
  - ✅ Comprehensive error handling with tagged errors
  - ✅ Bulk operations for performance optimization
  - ✅ Soft deletion support with audit trails
- [ ] **External Sync Functions** - Main reverse sync orchestration
  - Auto-discovery of transformers and API clients
  - Routing logic based on external links
  - Error handling and retry logic
  - Mirror mutator shape for consistency
  - Effect-based dependency injection

### **Phase 2: Zero Integration** (High Priority)

- [ ] **Auto-Generated Mutators** - Replace manual mutator definitions
  - Discover entities with `[OfEntity]` annotations
  - Generate consistent CRUD mutators with validation
  - Support custom overrides for specific business logic
  - Clean separation - no external sync concerns in mutators

### **Phase 3: Testing & Validation** (Medium Priority)

- [ ] **Integration Tests** - End-to-end reverse sync testing
- [ ] **Error Handling** - Comprehensive error scenarios
- [ ] **Performance Testing** - Bulk operations and rate limiting

## Architecture Overview

```
Zero Mutator (people.update) - Local operations only
    ↓
Server Handler yields External Sync Functions
    ↓
externalSyncFunctions.people.update(tx, input)
    ↓
ExternalLinkManager.getExternalLinksForEntity
    ↓
Schema.encode(pcoPersonTransformer) [EXISTING]
    ↓
PcoHttpClient.Person.update [EXISTING]
```

## Key Design Principles

1. **Effect-TS First** - All services use Effect service pattern
2. **Zero Configuration** - Leverage existing annotations and manifests
3. **Clean Mutators** - Mutators only handle local operations, no external sync
4. **Effect-Based External Sync** - External sync functions use proper dependency injection
5. **Database Health** - No external API calls during database transactions
6. **Mirrored Shape** - External sync functions mirror mutator structure
7. **Reuse Existing Infrastructure** - Build on proven HTTP clients and transformers
8. **Auto-Discovery** - Minimize manual configuration through schema introspection

## Architecture Pattern: Effect-Based External Sync

**✅ SOLUTION**: Using Effect dependency injection, we cleanly separate local mutations from external sync:

- **Clean Mutators**: Handle authentication, validation, and local database updates only
- **External Sync Functions**: Mirror mutator shape, handle external ChMS sync
- **Server Handler**: Uses Effect dependency injection to yield external sync functions
- **No Client Bloat**: Client mutators have no external sync code
- **Database Health**: External API calls don't hold database connections
- **Effect-Based**: Proper dependency management, no imperative patterns

## Success Criteria

- [ ] Auto-generated Zero mutators with consistent validation and patterns
- [ ] External sync properly separated using Effect dependency injection
- [ ] Standalone `pushToExternalSystems` function for SDK users
- [ ] New entities work automatically with `[OfEntity]` annotation
- [ ] Full Effect error handling and type safety
- [ ] Support for multiple ChMS adapters (PCO first, CCB future)

## Implementation Documents

1. **[Effect-Based External Sync](01-client-server-abstraction.md)** - **CRITICAL**: How to separate local mutations from external sync using Effect dependency injection
2. **[ExternalLinkManager Implementation](02-external-link-manager.md)** - Data access abstraction
3. **[External Sync Functions](03-external-sync-functions.md)** - Main sync orchestration functions
4. **[Auto-Generated Mutators](04-auto-generated-mutators.md)** - Zero mutator generation
5. **[Testing & Validation](05-testing-validation.md)** - Testing strategy

## Context Files for Implementation

Key files to understand before implementation:

### **Existing Infrastructure**

- `adapters/pco/api/pcoApi.ts` - HTTP client with auth, rate limiting, error handling
- `adapters/pco/transformer/pcoTransformer.ts` - Bidirectional schema transformers
- `adapters/pco/modules/people/pcoPersonSchema.ts` - Schema with OfEntity annotations
- `adapters/pco/base/pcoEntityManifest.ts` - Entity manifest structure
- `adapters/adapter-core/layers/tokenManager.ts` - Token management abstraction
- `backend/server/live/tokenManagerLive.ts` - Postgres token implementation

### **Current Mutators**

- `packages/zero/mutators.ts` - Current manual mutator implementation (clean, local-only)
- `backend/server/handlers/zeroMutatorsHandler.ts` - Server handler with dependency injection

### **Workflow Patterns**

- `backend/workers/workflows/pcoSyncWorkflow.ts` - Workflow orchestration pattern
- `backend/workers/workflows/pcoSyncEntityWorkflow.ts` - Entity-level sync pattern

This implementation will mirror the proven patterns from inbound sync while leveraging all existing infrastructure for maximum efficiency and reliability.
